---
title: ATO Walkthrough
navtitle: Walkthrough
parent: ATOs
---

### Step 0 — Create ATO checklist

As soon as you begin developing an [alpha](https://18f.gsa.gov/dashboard/stages/#alpha), [create your ATO checklist](../checklist/) to set up a tracking mechanism for your ATO. You can ask questions in your checklist thread to understand the specific considerations for your system.

### Step 1 — Determine impact level

Together with your Infrastructure Lead, categorize your system's impact levels using the [ATO Levels](../levels/) guide. If your are uncertain as to your system's impact level, you should consult with 18F Infrastructure early in your development process. If your system is providing novel or risky functions, or handling extremely sensitive data, you should consult with 18F Infrastructure as early as possible.

### Step 2 — Select controls

"Controls" are individual security requirements laid out by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). 
Your system's impact level baseline will determine the controls you need to implement. For a list of them, see the [Controls](../controls/) page. 

If your system's impact levels don't match one of the "overall levels" listed at [Levels](../levels/) (for example, you have a `low | moderate | moderate` system), you need to create a custom baseline. It's possible to downgrade the level for any particular control, as long as it doesn't affect any other controls with a higher level (e.g. account management can be `low` if it doesn't allow you to edit confidential data). 

### Step 3 — Document the controls

This step is essentially "state how your system meets each of the regulations". Using established web frameworks (Rails, Django, etc.) and hosting in cloud.gov takes care of a lot of the lower-level controls and security best practices for you, so you only need to be concerned with your application's custom code and configuration. This custom code and configuration is known as the "attack surface". 

Work together with your Infrastructure Lead on this step. The documentation generated by previous similar 18F projects can be helpful at this stage. Try to create a solid draft of this document.

#### Compliance Masonry

The [Compliance Masonry](https://github.com/opencontrol/compliance-masonry) YAML file uses structured data to state how each control is one of the following:

* Not relevant to the system
* Relevant to the system, and is one of the following:
    * Taken care of by one of:
        * The platform (cloud.gov)
        * The framework (Django, etc)
        * The authorization layer
        * Etc.
    * Implemented by you
    * Not yet taken care of

An "inherited" control would be something like FedRAMP requiring that fire extinguishers be present near the servers, which is something that AWS needs to worry about for _their_ compliance, and we don't need to re-explain when launching an application hosted there. Your Masonry file essentially contains the "overrides".

The controls that are _not_ inherited from an underlying system must be listed in your Masonry file with a short explanation ("narrative"), and "implemented" before the system can receive an ATO. "Implementation" in the compliance sense is the same as in the code sense: ensure that the system meets that requirement, based on current industry best practices.

### Step 4 — Assess the controls

In other words, "verify that your system is secure". The first step in doing so is to run the [security scans](../../security/scanning/). This is a preliminary assessment, final assessment will be done in collaboration with the GSA Office of the Chief Security Officer (OCISO). 

### Step 5 - Complete documentation package

Fill out the [System Security Plan (SSP)](../ssp/) and link from your project's [checklist](../checklist/) issue. We hope to auto-create the SSP from the Compliance Masonry YAML file at some point, but for now you should copy and paste.

Fill out the Rules of Engagement and Project Plan documents, and link from your project's [checklist](../checklist/) issue. Work with your Infrastructure Lead to get the most up to date templates for these documents.

The full list of data and functions in and of the system (in government parlance "mission based information types" and "delivery mechanisms") must be itemized in structured data. While the data types are obviously arbitrary and custom to each system we produce, the government has a formalized data set of mission functions that should be mapped to the system via [NIST 800-60](http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/SMA/fisma/categorization.html). For a Rails app, for example, this can simply be a link to the `db/schema.rb` file on GitHub.

### Step 6 - Authorize the system

Your Infrastructure Lead will work with you to schedule and prioritize your system assessment. Once assessment starts, the first step is that the Authorizing Official will review all the items in your ATO checklist including all the documents you generated.

When the items in the ATO checklist are ready, your Infrastructure Lead will circulate the Rules of Engagement document for signatures. 

Then, a team from the GSA OCISO will begin to follow the [Lightweight Security Authorization Process](https://insite.gsa.gov/portal/content/627230). They will conduct a penetration test on the system. Any penetration test findings deemed serious enough to prevent an ATO will need to be fixed right away to unblock the ATO process. They will alsoreview the SSP document and test the control narratives. This testing and review process may take 1-2 weeks and should be the top priority for the project team at the time.

Once all of the materials are prepared and testing is done and the system is considered "ready" by the Authorizing Official, they will sign the ATO memo.

### Step 7 — Continuously monitor the controls

There are several ways to ensure that your system remains compliant:

* Set up [static analysis](../../security/static-analysis/) to run on an ongoing basis through one of the hosted [services](../../security/static-analysis/#services).
* Set up [automated vulnerability scanning](../../security/dynamic-scanning/#automated-scanning).
* Keep your `about.yml`, `system-security-plan.yml`, and security-related documentation up-to-date.
